46750 - Optimization in Modern Power Systems
Assignment 1: Demand-Side Flexibility in Active Distribution Grids
(Bonus Question)
This bonus assignment corresponds to Question 2.(a) of Assignment 1. and should
be carried out in the same groups as Assignment 1 .
All data provided, problem statement and learning objectives provided in Assign-
ment 1, Questions 1.(a) - 1.(c) are still valid.
Each group should submit a single report using the recommended Latex Template in DTU
Learn, including concise answers to each question (rigorous and compact mathematical formu-
lations, with deﬁnition of all notations and description of all equations - including those intro-
duced in the main report of Assignment 1 and reused in this question, description of modeling
steps, relevant insights, adequate visual aids and tables), and an individual participation
table , summarizing the contribution (in %) of each student in Question 2.(a).
Grading: Each group will receive a grade between 0-15 points . These points will be adjusted
individually based on each student’s contribution to Question 2.(a), as reported in the partici-
pation table, and the adjustment rules illustrated in Figure 1, and will be added (as a bonus)
to their individual grade for Assignment 1. The resulting individual grade for assignment 1 will
count towards 40% of the ﬁnal grade.
Figure 1: Individual grade adjustment ratios, depending on % of total participation and number
of students/group
2.Value of demand-side ﬂexibility
Building on the individual models derived in Question 1, we further analyze the value of
demand-side ﬂexibility for various types of consumers, and derive actionable operational
and investment insights.
(a)This question is now optional, and all points have been redistributed be-
tween questions 1.(a)-1.(c). All bonus points scored in this question will
be added to your grade for assignment 1. Please submit your answers for
Question 2.(a) separately (no deadline).
We consider the ﬂexible consumer described in Question 1.(b), and conduct a techno-
economic analysis of the value of ﬂexibility, through duality.
i.(7 points) Describe in your own words the techno-economic meaning of the dual
formulation of the cost-minimization optimization problem of this consumer, de-
rived in Question 1.(b), including the dual variables associated with key con-
straints, and the Lagrange function. What economic signal does the value at
optimality of these dual variables provide?
ii.(8 points) Considering that this consumer wants to participate in the day-ahead
electricity market, derive their hourly demand (or supply) curve, representing their
marginal willingness to pay (or marginal opportunity cost) for purchasing (selling)
1 additional MWh of electricity in the market. Tip: you can use the KKT con-
ditions derived in Question 1.(b) to ﬁnd conditions linking the optimal quantity
purchased/sold on the market for varying electricity prices.
Page 5